[Onboarding] Security quickstart guides (#2017)
elastic/docs-content: solutions/security/get-started/get-started-detect-with-siem.md

applies_to:
  serverless:
products:
  - id: security
---

# Quickstart: Detect and respond to threats with SIEM

Elastic Security is a unified security solution that brings together SIEM, endpoint security, and cloud security into a single platform. This makes it easier to protect, investigate, and respond to security events from all areas within your environment.

In this guide, we'll learn how to use some of {{elastic-sec}}'s SIEM features to detect, investigate, and respond to threats. 

## Prerequisites 

To get started exploring {{elastic-sec}}, log in to your {{sec-serverless}} project. If you don't have one yet, refer to [Create a Security project](/solutions/security/get-started/create-security-project.md). 

:::::{stepper}

::::{step} Add data using Elastic Defend

Before you can start using {{elastic-sec}}, you need to choose an integration to start collecting and analyzing your data. For this guide, we're going to use the {{elastic-defend}} integration. {{elastic-defend}} detects and protects endpoints from malicious activity and provides automated response options before damage and loss occur. 

> 1. On the Get started home page, in the **Ingest your data** section, select **Elastic Defend**, then click **Add Elastic Defend**. 

Reviewer: Just leaving a single styling comment in case you decide against bolding the page name across the page.

```suggestion
1. On the **Get started** page, in the **Ingest your data** section, select **Elastic Defend**, then click **Add Elastic Defend**. 
```

2. On the next page that says, "Ready to add your first integration?", click **Install {{agent}}** in the lower-right corner. Although you *can* skip agent installation, for optimal event collection and threat detection, we recommend that you do not skip it. 

3. Select the appropriate operating system tab, then copy the commands. 
4. On the host, open a command-line interface and navigate to the directory where you want to install {{agent}}. Paste and run the commands to download, extract, enroll, and start {{agent}}. Once the agent is installed successfully, you'll see an "Agent enrollment confirmed" message. 

> 5. Click **Add the integration**, then Confirm incoming data on the next page.  

Reviewer: Looks like this is part of the instruction and not a new page. Feel free to ignore if it should be capitalized. 

```suggestion
5. Click **Add the integration**, then confirm incoming data on the next page.  
```

    After a few minutes, you should see the agent receiving data.

    :::{image} /solutions/images/security-gs-siem-install-agent.png
    :alt: Alerts page with visualizations section collapsed
    :screenshot:
    :::

:::{important}
If you’re using macOS, some versions may require you to grant {{elastic-endpoint}} Full Disk Access to different kernels, system extensions, or files. Refer to [Elastic Defend requirements](/solutions/security/configure-elastic-defend/elastic-defend-requirements.md) for more information.
:::
::::

::::{step} Add Elastic detection prebuilt rules

> Detection rules allow you to proactively monitor your environment by searching for source events, matches, sequences, or machine learning job anomaly results that meet their criteria. When a rule’s criteria are met, {{elastic-sec}} generates an alert. While you can create your own rules tailored for your environment, Elastic ships out-of-the-box prebuilt rules that you can install. 

Reviewer 2: I would not use "proactively" - the detections work off logs that are shipped to SIEM, so we detect things that happened post-factum. Suggest removing it.

To install and enable Elastic's prebuilt detection rules: 
1. On the Get Started page, scroll down to the **Configure rules and alerts** section. 

> 2. At the top of the page, click **Add Elastic rules**. The badge next to it shows the number of prebuilt rules available for installation. 

Reviewer: ++

If the **Get Started** page UI is changing, feel free to ignore this. Otherwise, I assume step 2 should describe this flow in the "Configure rules and alerts" section on the **Get Started** page:

<img width="800" alt="Screenshot 2025-07-07 at 4 06 44 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f1a7183f-ba51-4e37-9a90-3edb0c3daa78" />

>     The next pages displays the list of rules. Click on a rule name to view its details before you install it.  

Reviewer 2: Could we add here a screenshot with the details of the rule that the user wants to install?

Reviewer 2: I would move the rule details into the next step - makes sense to first find some relevant rules, and then look at the details. Rules previee contain information about Related integrations and we show if those are installed and Setup guide provides additional information about prerequisites.

Author: @approksiu I don't see the rule preview option for the out-of-box SIEM rules. But I'll add the sentence about viewing the details in the next step.

3. Use the search bar and **Tags** filter to find the rules you want to install. For example, to filter by operating system, search for the appropriate OS from the **Tags** menu (such as `macOS`). We recommend installing all the rules for your operating system, but you can install whichever rules you're comfortable with to start. You can always install more later.  
4. Select the check box next to rules you want to install. To select all rules on the page, select the check box to the left of the **Rule** column heading. 
5. Click ![Vertical boxes button](/solutions/images/serverless-boxesVertical.svg "") → **Install and enable** to install and start running the rules. Once you enable a rule, it starts running on its configured schedule.

:::{image} /solutions/images/security-gs-siem-install-rules.png 
:alt: Alerts page with visualizations section collapsed
:screenshot:
:::
    
    To learn how to view and manage all detection rules, refer to [Manage detection rules](/solutions/security/detect-and-alert/manage-detection-rules.md). 
::::

> ::::{step} Visualize and examine alert details 

Reviewer 3: Is this step also a prerequisite? The current structure suggests that all steps in the guide are prerequisites:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/59a85d4d-5973-4a11-a73c-5478f030bcae)

Reviewer: Part of me feels like this might be more appropriate under "Next steps" since all of the initial environment setup is complete. I also noticed that event analyzer is mentioned in step 3 [here](https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/2017/files#diff-1e1991b981492cb662abe7594352abcd847ecddcf6f71871211a063cb5c71c18R71) and later under "Next steps" [here](https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/2017/files#diff-1e1991b981492cb662abe7594352abcd847ecddcf6f71871211a063cb5c71c18R131). If you decide to keep step 3 under the "Prerequisites" section, maybe remove the event analyzer mention from "Next steps"?

> Now that you've installed and enabled rules, it's time to monitor the {{security-app}} to see if you receive any alerts. Remember, an alert is generated if any of the rule's criteria are met. {{elastic-sec}} provides several tools for investigating security events:

Reviewer: I can't find our guidelines on using app vs project when describing a solution (i.e., a project) in Serverless. Still flagging this in case our guidance advises against using "app" when describing Serverless functionality. 

```suggestion
Now that you've installed and enabled rules, it's time to monitor your {{sec-serverless}} project to see if you receive any alerts. Remember, an alert is generated if any of the rule's criteria are met. {{elastic-sec}} provides several tools for investigating security events:
```

* **Alerts table:** View all generated alerts in a comprehensive list, apply filters for a customized view, and drill down into details. 
* **Timeline:** Explore alerts in a central, interactive workspace. Create customized queries and collaborate on incident analysis by combining data from various sources.  
* **Visual event analyzer:** View a graphical timeline of processes that led up to the alert and the events that occurred immediately after.
* **Session View:** Examine Linux process data and real-time data insights. 

To view a quick video tutorial on how to use these features, on the Get Started page, scroll down to **View alerts**, select an alert tool from the list, and click **Play Video** on the right. 

For this guide, let's take a closer look at how to visualize and examine alert details by viewing the Alerts page. 

:::{note}
If you don't have any alerts yet in your environment, that's great news! You can use the [Elastic demo server](https://demo.elastic.co/) to explore alerts. 
:::

> To access the Alerts page, do one of the following: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To access the **Alerts** page, do one of the following: 
```

> * On the Get Started page, scroll down to the View alerts section, then click **View Alerts** at the bottom. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* On the **Get Started** page, scroll down to the **View alerts** section, then click **View Alerts** at the bottom. 
```

* From the left navigation menu, select **Alerts**. 

:::{image} /solutions/images/security-gs-siem-alerts-pg.png 
:alt: Alerts page overview
:screenshot:
:::

> At the top of the Alerts page are four filter controls: **Status**, **Severity**, **User**, and **Host** that you can use to filter your alerts view. With the exception of **Status**, you can [edit and customize](/solutions/security/detect-and-alert/manage-detection-alerts.md#drop-down-filter-controls) these to your preference. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At the top of the **Alerts** page are four filter controls—**Status**, **Severity**, **User**, and **Host**—that you can use to filter your alerts view. With the exception of **Status**, you can [edit and customize](/solutions/security/detect-and-alert/manage-detection-alerts.md#drop-down-filter-controls) these to your preference. 
```

4.  On the host, open a command-line interface and navigate to the directory where you want to install {{agent}}. Paste and run the commands from {{fleet}} to download, extract, enroll, and start {{agent}}.
5. (Optional) Return to the **Add agent** flyout, and observe the **Confirm agent enrollment** and **Confirm incoming data** steps automatically checking the host connection. It may take a few minutes for data to arrive in {{es}}.
6. (Optional) After you have enrolled the {{agent}} on your host, you can click **View enrolled agents** to access the list of agents enrolled in {{fleet}}. Otherwise, select **Close**.

    The host will now appear on the **Endpoints** page in the {{security-app}} (**Assets** → **Endpoints**). It may take another minute or two for endpoint data to appear in {{elastic-sec}}.

:::{important}
If you’re using macOS, some versions may require you to grant {{elastic-endpoint}} Full Disk Access to different kernels, system extensions, or files. Refer to [Elastic Defend requirements](/solutions/security/configure-elastic-defend/elastic-defend-requirements.md) for more information.
:::
:::
::::

::::{step} Modify policy configuration settings

> After you install the {{agent}} with {{elastic-defend}}, the Endpoint Security ({{elastic-defend}}) detection rule is automatically enabled and can generate either detection or protection alerts

Reviewer 2: Dot missing at the end of this sentence.

Reviewer 4: Good catch! Fixed in 21bbbe16b20524e694fd9715ab115a563de7433f

4.  On the host, open a command-line interface and navigate to the directory where you want to install {{agent}}. Paste and run the commands from {{fleet}} to download, extract, enroll, and start {{agent}}.
5. (Optional) Return to the **Add agent** flyout, and observe the **Confirm agent enrollment** and **Confirm incoming data** steps automatically checking the host connection. It may take a few minutes for data to arrive in {{es}}.
6. (Optional) After you have enrolled the {{agent}} on your host, you can click **View enrolled agents** to access the list of agents enrolled in {{fleet}}. Otherwise, select **Close**.

    The host will now appear on the **Endpoints** page in the {{security-app}} (**Assets** → **Endpoints**). It may take another minute or two for endpoint data to appear in {{elastic-sec}}.

:::{important}
If you’re using macOS, some versions may require you to grant {{elastic-endpoint}} Full Disk Access to different kernels, system extensions, or files. Refer to [Elastic Defend requirements](/solutions/security/configure-elastic-defend/elastic-defend-requirements.md) for more information.
:::
:::
::::

::::{step} Modify policy configuration settings

> After you install the {{agent}} with {{elastic-defend}}, the Endpoint Security ({{elastic-defend}}) detection rule is automatically enabled, which also enables several endpoint protections—such as preventions against malware, ransomware, memory threats, and other malicious behavior—on protected hosts. This means that not only does {{elastic-defend}} monitor for these behaviors and generates an alert if any are detected, but it also blocks it. Due to this maximum level of protection, we recommend modifying the policy to _detect_ instead of _prevent_ so that only an alert will be generated, and you can decide how to respond to the threat. Then, closely monitor which alerts and how many are generating over a specific time period before enabling higher protection, if needed. 

Reviewer 2: At the Defend installation, Endpoint Security (Elastic Defend) is automatically installed and enabled. The rule does not enable endpoint protections, those need to be set up by the user. The rules will just create SIEM alerts for either - detection or protection alerts.

:::{dropdown} Steps to modify an endpoint policy
1. From the left navigation menu, go to **Assets** → **Endpoints** → **Policies**. 
2. From the list, select the policy you want to configure. The policy configuration page appears.
3. On the **Policy settings** tab, for each protection, switch the protection level from `Prevent` to `Detect`. 
4. Review and configure the event collection and antivirus settings as appropriate. 
5. Once you're finished making changes, click **Save** in the lower-right corner to update the policy.  

:::{note}
For a comprehensive explanation of all endpoint protections and policy settings, refer to [Configure an integration policy](/solutions/security/configure-elastic-defend/configure-an-integration-policy-for-elastic-defend.md). 
:::
:::
:::::

## Add Elastic prebuilt detection rules

> Detection rules allow you to monitor your environment by searching for source events, matches, sequences, or {{ml}} job anomaly results that meet their criteria. When a rule’s criteria are met, {{elastic-sec}} generates an alert. While you can create your own rules tailored for your environment, Elastic ships out-of-the-box prebuilt rules that you can install. Remember that if you installed {{elastic-defend}}, the Endpoint Security rule is already enabled. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Detection rules allow you to monitor your environment by searching for source events, matches, sequences, or {{ml}} job anomaly results that meet their criteria. When a rule’s criteria are met, {{elastic-sec}} generates an alert. While you can create your own rules tailored for your environment, Elastic ships out-of-the-box prebuilt rules that you can install. If you installed {{elastic-defend}}, the Endpoint Security ({{elastic-defend}}) rule is automatically enabled after you install it. 
```

Reviewer 2: with defend installation this rule is installed automatically

:::{dropdown} Steps to install and enable prebuilt rules
1. On the **Get Started** page, scroll down to the **Configure rules and alerts** section. 

> 2. Click **Install Elastic rules**, then **Add Elastic rules**. The Rules page displays. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Click **Install Elastic rules**, then **Add Elastic rules**. The **Rules** page displays. 
```

5. Once you've filtered the rules, confirm that the rules displayed are the ones you'd like to install. If you'd like to learn more about any rule before installing it, click on the rule name to expand the rule details flyout. Here's an example of one: 

    :::{image} /solutions/images/security-gs-siem-rule-details.png 
    :alt: Rule details flyout
    :screenshot:
    :::

6. Select the check box next to the rules you want to install. To select all rules on the page, select the check box to the left of the **Rule** column heading. We recommend installing all the rules for your operating system, but you can install whichever rules you're comfortable with to start. You can always install more later.  
7. Click ![Vertical boxes button](/solutions/images/serverless-boxesVertical.svg "") → **Install and enable** to install and start running the rules. Once you enable a rule, it starts running on its configured schedule.

    :::{note}
    You must install _and_ enable the rule for it to start running; therefore, do not select the **Install _x_ rules** option.  

>     :::

Reviewer 2: I think "do not select the Install x rules option" is a bit too strong statement, I suggest saying something "to speed up the process for the quick start, select Install and Enable option. The alternative is to enable a rule once it is installed from Installed rules table.

:::{note}
If you don't have any alerts yet in your environment, that's great news! You can use the [Elastic demo server](https://demo.elastic.co/) to explore alerts. 
:::

To access the **Alerts** page, do one of the following: 
* On the **Get Started** page, scroll down to the **View alerts** section, then click **View Alerts** at the bottom. 
* From the left navigation menu, select **Alerts**. 

:::{image} /solutions/images/security-gs-siem-alerts-pg.png 
:alt: Alerts page overview
:screenshot:
:::

At the top of the **Alerts** page are four filter controls—**Status**, **Severity**, **User**, and **Host**—that you can use to filter your alerts view. Except for **Status**, you can [edit and customize](/solutions/security/detect-and-alert/manage-detection-alerts.md#drop-down-filter-controls) these to your preference. 

In the visualization section, you can group alerts by a specific view type: 
* **Summary:** Shows how alerts are distributed across specific indicators.
* **Trend:** Shows the occurrence of alerts over time. 
* **Counts:** Shows the count of alerts in each group. Although there are default values, you can change the `Group by` parameters. 

> * **Treemap:** Shows the distribution of alerts as nested, proportionally-sized and color-coded tiles based on the number of alerts, and the alert's risk score. This view is useful to quickly pinpoint the most critical alerts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Treemap:** Shows the distribution of alerts as nested, proportionally sized and color-coded tiles based on the number of alerts, and the alert's risk score. This view is useful to quickly pinpoint the most critical alerts.
```
